This text is a script of the audio recorded for the lab-12 presentation for AERE-361.
Written by Zachary Luppen.

1: Hello everybody, teaching assistant Zachary Luppen here. Welcome back to another week of programming!
This week’s lab is lab 12, titled, “Pair Programming”. Just like the last couple weeks, I’ll first be
discussing various logistical items, and then I’ll proceed with describing the lab. So let’s dive in!

2: Lab 9 is just about done getting graded. If you have comments or concerns, then please let us know
right away! The TAs are here to help you, but we can only do so much if nobody messages us. We understand
it may stink to have to email us, but we’re a bit limited in what we can do with being solely online.
Lab 10 will be getting graded soon. As for Lab 11, since you just turned it in, we’ll be grading it down
the line.

3: Since we’ve moved to online instruction, we want to ensure that we can answer questions for the course
as effectively as possible. The 361ta@temporallogic.org email is still the best go-to for any questions
you may have (once you’ve exhausted looking through your resources for the course). Our office hours are
hosted over WebEx at the same times listed on the course website. I am sending out an email each Sunday
reminding everybody of my office hours as well as providing the link to connect over WebEx. You are also
free to ask questions about your grades and such during office hours, but we may institute just asking 
over private messaging in order to maintain privacy. A new resource that we’ve introduced is the TopHat
discussion forum. We are creating a forum for each lab, where all of you are allowed to ask questions
and have them answered. We are also posting questions and answers from the 361 email. This resource is
here to answer the questions your classmates are asking us, so that you might be able to resolve that
issue as well. It will not be graded. And just to reiterate, all of the posts on the discussion forum
are anonymous to the class, but not the instructor and TAs. So please keep your comments appropriate or
you won’t be able to use the discussion forum. The discussion forum for lab 12 is aptly titled,
“Lab 12 Discussion.”

4: All that done, let’s actually get into lab 12 for this week!

5: So as mentioned, this lab is titled “Pair Programming.” For this lab, you will be working in teams and
collaborating to build a game in C. This lab is meant to reinforce good programming practices with
everything you’ve learned so far, teach you how to use gnuplot to plot datasets in your code, and develop
a game where you guide a drone to survey the majority of a grid world. More on that soon. First, let’s
talk about groups.

6: I sent out an email last week asking everybody to get into groups for this lab early, so people aren’t
left looking for partners at the start of the lab. For those who have already chosen your groups, first
off, thank you very much! You’ve made organizing this lab a bit easier. Organized groups will be able to
use the Github Classroom link to properly get into the already-proposed groups. I expect consistency in
the groups that have been assigned so far, as well as your proposed group names.

Everyone who has let us know they need a group has been assigned via email, so you’ll be able to use the
Github Classroom links in a similar fashion.

A majority of the students in the class has let us know their group status, but a good number still has
not. If you are still in need of a group, then please let the TAs know promptly. Otherwise, you’ll be on
your own for organizing a group to do this assignment. And yes, groups are required for this lab. That’s
the point of a group lab.

7: One of the main items you’ll be making use of this week is gnuplot. Gnuplot is used, as the name
suggests, to plot data in C. It has a bunch of customizable features and can be used via the terminal.
We have included some very simple implementations of Gnuplot in the lab manual to get you started. I also
highly recommend using the provided reference for seeing how to do more complex implementations.
Seriously, it’ll really help you out!

8: Another item we’d like to introduce you to is system calls in C programs. As some of you have figured
out, you’re able to call just about any Linux command from a C program. Using the system and popen
commands, you can run loads of commands for your purposes. This doesn’t mean “every single command in
existence.” It depends upon the operating system. I highly recommend looking at the man pages for both to
get a better idea of what they do. There’s also lots of documentation online about how they work.

9: We’ll be introducing you to two new C types for this lab. Unions and Void Pointers. A Union acts
exactly like a struct, except that instead of having an “and” relationship with its values, it has an
“or” relationship. And then we have void pointers, which allow a user to store a variable at runtime,
but it is unknown at compile time.

10: Your goal this week is to create a drone surveillance game in C, using the knowledge you’ve gained
throughout the semester. This is not an easy task, hence why we’ve paired you up in groups. To hopefully
make this go more smoothly. The game consists of having an agent – in reality, a nonvisible entity on
this grid – automatically explore a world that is mapped onto a plot. Automatically. That means, this
isn’t a game that you introduce to someone and have them play. You should be able to run a single
command and have the agent move through a map. For this map, imagine a 10x10 plot of squares, with
user-defined barriers, and you have to navigate through the whole map while answering challenges with
each move that you make. I’m sure that sounds a bit “whoa,” so let’s take a closer look.

11: One of the first things you’ll need to do is create a game world on a 10x10 grid. This will be the
game world in which the agent moves. Here in this graphical representation, we have a green area
indicating grass where an agent could walk, and grey indicates barriers/walls where the agent cannot go.
The goal of the agent is to navigate through as much of this map as possible, avoiding the barriers and
exploring as many squares as possible, with each move requiring the completion of a challenge. In
operation, the agent won’t be able to see the entire 10x10 grid, only a 3x3, with the agent in the center
and the other 8 squares around it visible. Let’s look at that view on the next slide.

12: As you see on this slide, the agent is not able to see the entire game world. Instead, they see a
3x3 grid, and have to navigate through the game world to explore as many squares as possible. In this
case, the agent is in the middle – the agent can be invisible, the center square just indicates that
that’s where the agent is – and around it are mostly green squares that can be moved to, and one barrier
square. So the agent is pretty mobile in this case. Let’s take a closer look at how the agent will be
able to move.

13: The agent will be able to move North, East, South, West, using the numbers 1-4. So, the program will
automatically ask for a number 1-4 and receive an answer. This won’t require user input. It will happen
automatically. This would be a good step to get implemented before moving onto the challenges, which are
what can prevent the agent from moving. Which way the agent moves depends on the obstacles it encounters.

14: Challenges consist of a bunch of various computations that need to be done in order to allow the
agent to move. I’ve listed a couple examples here. The agent could be given a random list of numbers, and
has to calculate the mean, maximum or minimum. Or find the difference between two integers. Or invert a
string. Just a bunch of little challenges that the agent will have to overcome. There’s a full list of
these challenges given in the lab manual. The goal is to implement all of them. Remember that your agent
will have to move automatically, and not have these challenges solved by a user playing the game. It’s
not supposed to be a game that you run, and then select where you want to go. The idea is to create a
program that will automatically have the agent move through the environment.

15: In brief summary, we want you to program a virtual 10x10 world, in which an agent will navigate and
try to visit as many squares as possible. You’ll want to keep track of the number of squares visited
since that’s the goal here. Your agent will only be able to see a 3x3 view around them, so the agent
won’t see the entire map. The agent will be able to move North, East, South, and West, but only after a
challenge has been successfully solved. There’s a bunch of different challenges that you need to
implement.

16: A video of a sample solution is available on Dr. Rozier’s website. I greatly recommend taking a look
at it so that you and your group mates can get an idea for how you want to structure your program. It
should hopefully clarify some of the questions you may have.

17: Your LaTeX report this week should have the following components: a title page, references, a
discussion of how you went about programming your game and a discussion of encountered difficulties. I
also recommend explaining what your code does, as well as dicussing how the work for the lab was
allocated amongst your team members.

18: Let’s look at the point distribution for this lab. 90 of the points will be awarded for implementing
the various challenges the agent will face. 10 points for the actual display functionality that you
create. And 10 points for the LaTeX report. Additionally, “glitter points” can also be awarded for extra
functionality, at the discretion of the TAs. Obviously focus on getting all of the main functionality
set up, but additional functionality would be great!

19: Always remember that since lab 8, we are now running the make command directly in your lab
repositories when grading. A makefile is already written and provided for you, but you are free to add
more functionality if necessary, depending on your program.

20: I’ve got just some general advice for you as you do this assignment. Recall that we said at the very
beginning of the semester that the labs will be ramping up in difficulty, this is still true. We
understand going online may make this even a step more difficult, but again, we still expect you to be
able to do these assignments utilizing the resources given to you. Something that Dr. Rozier thought I
should mention, a lot of the final labs of this semester generally require a fair amount of back-and-forth
conversation and troubleshooting, which is obviously difficult to do in our current situation. We
therefore recommend you attend lectures, labs and office hours, and also email us questions. The sooner
you email us, the faster you’ll be able to receive a response. It’s gotten harder to answer questions
being just virtual, so ask a question as soon as you can! Also remember that Dr. Rozier said that these 
labs will eat your lives, especially towards the end of the semester. Don’t be one of the people who 
clones their Github repository the day before the lab is due and attempts to finish it in 24 hours or 
less. It’s just not going to be possible for the last labs this semester unless you have Spock-like logic
 and knowledge of programming.

This additional text is a transcript of the video detailing the sample solution for lab-12.


Hello again everybody! In order to make sure you get ample resources to go about your programming, I’m
also going to be showing you a sample implementation of this lab so you get ideas for how to structure
your program. I also want to make sure that everybody can get a decent idea of what we’re trying to have
you do in this lab, since certain aspects could get misinterpreted.  I do hope it helps, because this is
a decently challenging lab!

Your “include” directory contains the header file for this lab, which has a lot of useful content that
you will need to reference. There is a duplicate of this file in your lab repository, so again, no need
to spend time working on this particular portion of your implementation.

Your “lib” directory contains the “libsimulator.a” file that is needed in your makefile. This file is
used to do simulations, like what you’re doing. You can effectively ignore this file, and just know that
it only gets referenced in your already-written makefile.

Your “src” directory contains the “DroneWars.c” file where you’ll spend most of your time writing the
functionality for your programs. I obviously can’t show you the contents of this file since it’s what
you need to write!

Now, I’ll show you the contents of the makefile for making your drone program.  There is an exact copy
of it in your lab repository, so there’s no stressful finagling with the makefile trying to get it to
work. I know this has been a bottleneck for a lot of people, so hopefully not needing to create the
makefile will make things easier. Notice how there’s a “run” target which executes the DroneWars program.
So, by executing “make run” you’ll be able to run and test your program!

I’ve already run the make command here, and I’ve got a DroneWars program in my repo. So let’s execute 
“make run.” Ooh, that was a lot of stuff that just happened. Let’s scroll back up to the top and take a
look at the output. So in this implementation, the group created a 10x10 grid, indicated 9 rounds of the
agent moving would occur, and said that the agent starts at positions X and Y. Their program also
randomly generated barriers in some of the locations on the grid as well, indicated by the 1s on the map. This implementation is by no means perfect – you may have noticed it doesn’t entirely appear this is a 10x10 grid, but it is.
So for the first round, one of the challenges was randomly selected and generated for the program to
solve. The functionality to recognize the challenge and answer it will be implemented by you. In this
case, a [Challenge] challenge was given. The program/agent recognized the challenge (or challenge as
shown in the program) and attempted to solve it. The challenge was answered successfully, and so the
agent was allowed to move one square. In this case, the agent chose to move North/1.

In round 2, a challenge was given. It looks like the program solved it successfully, so the agent got to 
move again. And so on. I’ll scroll through this implementation slowly now so you can see the rest of the
output. At the very end of the execution, your program should print out the score of the agent. In this
case, it was  as per the implementation of this group.

I understand that this program may look daunting, hence why I recommend you start working on it early
and ask us questions as often as you can!


